---
title: 心品
subtitle: Citta 3:33-43
date: 2016-09-05
weight: 3
css:
  - /css/style_translation.css
---

{{<subtitle>}}Citta{{</subtitle>}}

- 心品
- {{<serif>}}Thought{{</serif>}}

---

##### 33

Phandanaṃ capalaṃ cittaṃ, dūrakkhaṃ dunnivārayaṃ, ujuṃ karoti medhāvī, usukāro va tejanaṃ.

- 輕動變易心，難護難制服，智者調直之，如匠搦箭直。
- {{<serif>}}The wise man makes straight his trembling, unsteady thought which is difficult to guard and difficult to restrain, just as a fletcher makes an arrow straight.{{</serif>}}

##### 34

Vārijo va thale khitto, okamokata ubbhato, pariphandatidaṃ cittaṃ, māradheyyaṃ pahātave.

- 如魚離水棲，投於陸地上，以此戰慄心，擺脫魔境界。
- {{<serif>}}Like a fish taken from its watery home and thrown on the ground, this thought quivers all over in order to escape the dominion of Māra.{{</serif>}}

---

##### 35

Dunniggahassa lahuno, yatthakāmanipātino, cittassa damatho sādhu, cittaṃ dantaṃ sukhāvahaṃ.

- 此心隨欲轉，輕躁難捉摸，善哉心調伏，心調得安樂。
- {{<serif>}}Good is the taming of thought which is hard to grasp, light, alighting where it will. Tamed thought is the bringer of happiness.{{</serif>}}

##### 36

Sududdasaṃ sunipuṇaṃ, yatthakāmanipātinaṃ, cittaṃ rakkhetha medhāvī, cittaṃ guttaṃ sukhāvahaṃ.

- 此心隨欲轉，微妙極難見，智者防護心，心護得安樂。
- {{<serif>}}A wise man should guard his thought, which is difficult to see, extremely subtle, alighting where it will. Guarded thought is the bringer of happiness.{{</serif>}}

---

##### 37

Dūraṅgamaṃ ekacaraṃ, asarīraṃ guhāsayaṃ, ye cittaṃ saṃyam-essanti, mokkhanti mārabandhanā.

- 遠行與獨行，無形隱深窟，誰能調伏心，解脫魔羅縛。
- {{<serif>}}Those who will restrain their thought, which travels far, alone, incorporeal, lying in the cave (of the heart), will be freed from Māra's fetter.{{</serif>}}

---

##### 38

Anavaṭṭhitacittassa, saddhammaṃ avijānato, pariplavapasādassa, paññā na paripūrati.

- 心若不安定，又不了正法，信心不堅者，智慧不成就。
- {{<serif>}}The wisdom of one whose thought is unsteady, who does not know the true doctrine, whose serenity of mind is troubled, is not perfected.{{</serif>}}

##### 39

Anavassutacittassa, ananvāhatacetaso, puññapāpapahīnassa, natthi jāgarato bhayaṃ.

- 若得無漏心，亦無諸惑亂，超越善與惡，覺者無恐怖。
- {{<serif>}}There is no fear for one whose thought is untroubled (by faults), whose thought is unagitated, who is freed from good and evil, who is awake.{{</serif>}}

---

##### 40

Kumbhūpamaṃ kāyam-imaṃ viditvā, nagarūpamaṃ cittam-idaṃ ṭhapetvā, yodhetha māraṃ paññāvudhena, jitañca rakkhe anivesano siyā.

- 知身如陶器，住心似城廓，慧劍擊魔羅，守勝莫染著。
- {{<serif>}}Knowing that this body is (fragile) like a jar, making this thought (firm) like a city, one should fight Māra with the weapon of wisdom, and one should guard what has been conquered, one should take no rest.{{</serif>}}

---

##### 41

Aciraṃ vatayaṃ kāyo, pathaviṃ adhisessati, chuddho apetaviññāṇo, niratthaṃ va kaliṅgaraṃ.

- 此身實不久，當睡於地下，被棄無意識，無用如木屑。
- {{<serif>}}Before long, alas, this body will lie on the earth, rejected, without consciousness, like a useless log of wood.{{</serif>}}

---

##### 42

Diso disaṃ yaṃ taṃ kayirā, verī vā pana verinaṃ, micchāpaṇihitaṃ cittaṃ, pāpiyo naṃ tato kare.

- 仇敵害仇敵，怨家對怨家，若心向邪行，惡業最為大。
- {{<serif>}}Whatever an enemy may do to an enemy or, again, whatever a hater may do to a hater, a wrongly directed mind would do worse than that to him.{{</serif>}}

##### 43

Na taṃ mātā pitā kayirā, aññe vā pi ca ñātakā, sammāpaṇihitaṃ cittaṃ, seyyaso naṃ tato kare.

- 善非父母作，亦非他眷屬，若心向正行，善業最為大。
- {{<serif>}}A mother or father or any other relative would not do that (good), a rightly directed mind would do better than that to him.{{</serif>}}