---
title: 喜愛品
subtitle: Piya 16:209-220
date: 2016-09-05
weight: 16
css:
  - /css/style_translation.css
---

{{<subtitle>}}Piya{{</subtitle>}}

- 喜愛品
- {{<serif>}}Pleasant{{</serif>}}

---

##### 209

Ayoge yuñjam-attānaṃ, yogasmiñca ayojayaṃ, atthaṃ hitvā piyaggāhī, pihetattānuyoginaṃ.

- 專事不當事，不事於應修，棄善趨愛欲，卻羨自勉者。
- {{<serif>}}Joining oneself to distraction, not joining oneself to concentration, abandoning one's goal and seizing what is pleasant, one envies the one who applies himself to the goal.{{</serif>}}

##### 210

Mā piyehi samāgañchi, appiyehi kudācanaṃ, piyānaṃ adassanaṃ dukkhaṃ, appiyānañca dassanaṃ.

- 莫結交愛人，莫結不愛人，不見愛人苦，見憎人亦苦。
- {{<serif>}}Do not at any time associate withe pleasant (or) unpleasant things. Not seeing pleasant things is painful, and also seeing unpleasant things.{{</serif>}}

##### 211

Tasmā piyaṃ na kayirātha, piyāpāyo hi pāpako, ganthā tesaṃ na vijjanti, yesaṃ natthi piyāppiyaṃ.

- 是故莫愛著，愛別離為苦，若無愛與憎，彼即無羈縛。
- {{<serif>}}Therefore one should not treat anything as pleasant, for the loss of the pleasant is evil. There are no bonds for those for whom there is neither pleasant nor unpleasant.{{</serif>}}

---

##### 212

Piyato jāyatī soko, piyato jāyatī bhayaṃ, piyato vippamuttassa, natthi soko kuto bhayaṃ?

- 從喜愛生憂，從喜愛生怖，離喜愛無憂，何處有恐怖。
- {{<serif>}}From what is pleasant comes grief, from what is pleasant comes fear. For one who is freed from what is pleasant there is no grief, much less fear.{{</serif>}}

##### 213

Pemato jāyatī soko, pemato jāyatī bhayaṃ, pemato vippamuttassa, natthi soko kuto bhayaṃ?

- 從親愛生憂，從親愛生怖，離親愛無憂，何處有恐怖。
- {{<serif>}}From love comes grief, from love comes fear. For one who is freed from love there is no grief, much less fear.{{</serif>}}

##### 214

Ratiyā jāyatī soko, ratiyā jāyatī bhayaṃ, ratiyā vippamuttassa, natthi soko kuto bhayaṃ?

- 從貪欲生憂，從貪欲生怖，離貪欲無憂，何處有恐怖。
- {{<serif>}}From delight comes grief, from delight comes fear. For one who is freed from delight there is no grief, much less fear.{{</serif>}}

##### 215

Kāmato jāyatī soko, kāmato jāyatī bhayaṃ, kāmato vippamuttassa, natthi soko kuto bhayaṃ?

- 從欲樂生憂，從欲樂生怖，離欲樂無憂，何處有恐怖。
- {{<serif>}}From sensual pleasure comes grief, from sensual pleasure comes fear. For one who is freed from sensual pleasure there is no grief, much less fear.{{</serif>}}

##### 216

Taṇhāya jāyatī soko, taṇhāya jāyatī bhayaṃ, taṇhāya vippamuttassa, natthi soko kuto bhayaṃ?

- 從愛欲生憂，從愛欲生怖，離愛欲無憂，何處有恐怖。
- {{<serif>}}From craving comes grief, from craving comes fear. For one who is freed from craving there is no grief, much less fear.{{</serif>}}

---

##### 217

Sīladassanasampannaṃ, dhammaṭṭhaṃ saccavedinaṃ, attano kamma kubbānaṃ, taṃ jano kurute piyaṃ.

- 具戒及正見，住法知真諦，圓滿自所行，彼為世人愛。
- {{<serif>}}One who has virtue and insight, is righteous, speaking the truth, doing his own tasks, him people hold dear.{{</serif>}}

---

##### 218

Chandajāto anakkhāte, manasā ca phuṭo siyā, kāmesu ca appaṭibaddhacitto, “uddhaṃsoto” ti vuccati.

- 渴求離言法，充滿思慮心，諸欲心不著，是名上流人。
- {{<serif>}}One should have a desire for the undefined, and be suffused with mind, and have one's thought not tied to sensual pleasures, (such a one) is called an up-streamer.{{</serif>}}

---

##### 219

Cirappavāsiṃ purisaṃ, dūrato sotthim-āgataṃ, ñātimittā suhajjā ca, abhinandanti āgataṃ.

- 久客異鄉者，自遠處安歸，親友與知識，歡喜而迎彼。
- {{<serif>}}A man who has been abroad for a long time, (and) has come back to safety from afar, him kinsmen, friends and companions welcome when he has come back.{{</serif>}}

##### 220

Tatheva katapuññam pi, asmā lokā paraṃ gataṃ, puññāni paṭigaṇhanti, piyaṃ ñātīva āgataṃ.

- 造福亦如是，從此生彼界，福業如親友，以迎愛者來。
- {{<serif>}}In the same way his merits also receive one who has performed merits, gone from this world to the next world, as kinsmen receive a dear one who has come back.{{</serif>}}