---
title: 象品
subtitle: Nāga 23:320-333
date: 2016-09-05
weight: 23
layout: single_translation
---

- Nāga
- The Elephant

---

##### 320

Ahaṃ nāgo va saṅgāme, cāpato patitaṃ saraṃ, ativākyaṃ titikkhissaṃ, dussīlo hi bahujjano.

- 如象在戰陣，堪忍弓箭射，我忍謗亦爾，世多破戒者。
- I shall endure abuse as a nāga elephant in battle endures arrows shot from the bow. Ill-natured indeed are the majority of people.

##### 321

Dantaṃ nayanti samitiṃ, dantaṃ rājābhirūhati, danto seṭṭho manussesu, yotivākyaṃ titikkhati.

- 調禦象可赴集會，調禦象可為王乘，若能堪忍於謗言，人中最勝調禦者。
- They lead a tamed one to war, the king mounts a tamed one. The tamed one, who endures abuse, is the best among men.

##### 322

Varam-assatarā dantā, ājānīyā ca sindhavā, kuñjarā ca mahānāgā, attadanto tato varaṃ.

- 調禦之騾為優良，信度駿馬為優良，矯羅大象亦優良，自調禦者更優良。
- Excellent are mules when tamed and Sindh thoroughbreds and great kuñjara nāga elephant, better than these is a tamed self.

---

##### 323

Na hi etehi yānehi, gaccheyya agataṃ disaṃ, yathāttanā sudantena, danto dantena gacchati.

- 實非彼等車乘，得達難到境地，若人善自調禦，由於調禦得達。
- For not by these vehicles would a man go to the region where there is no rebirth, as by means of a well-tamed self. The tamed one goes by means of a tamed (vehicle).

---

##### 324

Dhanapālo nāma kuñjaro, kaṭukabhedano dunnivārayo, baddho kabaḷaṃ na bhuñjati, sumarati nāgavanassa kuñjaro.

- 如象名財護，泌液暴難制，繫縛不入食，惟念於象林。
- The kuñjara elephant called Dhanapālaka is hard to control when he is oozing with rut. When tied up the kuñjara elephant does not eat a mouthful of food, (but) remembers the nāga elephant forest.

---

##### 325

Middhī yadā hoti mahagghaso ca, niddāyitā samparivattasāyī, mahāvarāho va nivāpapuṭṭho, punappunaṃ gabbham-upeti mando.

- 樂睡又貪食，轉側唯長眠，如豬食無厭，愚者數入胎。
- When he is lazy and a glutton, a sleeper who rolls as he lies, like a great hog fed on grain, the fool comes to the womb again and again.

---

##### 326

Idaṃ pure cittam-acāri cārikaṃ, yenicchakaṃ yatthakāmaṃ yathāsukhaṃ, tad-ajjahaṃ niggahessāmi yoniso, hatthippabhinnaṃ viya aṅkusaggaho.

- 我此過去心，任意隨所欲，隨愛好遊行，我今悉調伏，如象師持鉤，制禦泌液象。
- Formerly this mind wandered where it wished, where it liked, as it pleased. Today I shall control it properly, as a hook-holder controls an elephant in rut.

---

##### 327

Appamādaratā hotha, sacittam-anurakkhatha, duggā uddharathattānaṃ, paṅke sanno va kuñjaro.

- 當樂不放逸，善護於自心，自救出難處，如象出泥坑。
- Be rejoicing in carefulness, protect your own mind, save yourselves from the difficult way like a kuñjara elephant sunk-in mud.

---

##### 328

Sace labhetha nipakaṃ sahāyaṃ, saddhiṃ caraṃ sādhuvihāridhīraṃ, abhibhuyya sabbāni parissayāni, careyya tenattamano satīmā.

- 若得同行伴，善行富智慮，能服諸艱困，欣然共彼行。
- If one finds a zealous companion, a co-wanderer, a good-liver, wise, overcoming all dangers one should wander with him, happy (and) mindful.

##### 329

No ce labhetha nipakaṃ sahāyaṃ, saddhiṃ caraṃ sādhuvihāridhīraṃ, rājā va raṭṭhaṃ vijitaṃ pahāya, eko care mātaṅgaraññe va nāgo.

- 若無同行伴，善行富智慮，應如王棄國，如象獨行林。
- If one does not find a zealous companion, a co-wanderer, a good-liver, wise, like a king leaving a conquered kingdom one should wander alone like a mātaṅga nāga elephant in the forest.

##### 330

Ekassa caritaṃ seyyo, natthi bāle sahāyatā, eko care na ca pāpāni kayirā, appossukko mātaṅgaraññe va nāgo.

- 寧一人獨行，不與愚為友，獨行離欲惡，如象獨游林。
- Wandering for a solitary person is better, there is no companionship with fools. One should wander alone and one should not do evil deeds, desirous of little, like a mātaṅga nāga elephant in the forest.

---

##### 331

Atthamhi jātamhi sukhā sahāyā, tuṭṭhī sukhā yā itarītarena, puññaṃ sukhaṃ jīvitasaṅkhayamhi, sabbassa dukkhassa sukhaṃ pahānaṃ.

- 應時得友樂，適時滿足樂，命終善業樂，離一切苦樂。
- Companions are pleasant when a need arises, contentment with this or that (i.e. with whatever turns up) is pleasant, merit is pleasant at the end of life, the abandonment of all pain is pleasant.

##### 332

Sukhā matteyyatā loke, atho petteyyatā sukhā, sukhā sāmaññatā loke, atho brahmaññatā sukhā.

- 世中敬母樂，敬父親亦樂，世敬沙門樂，敬聖人亦樂。
- Respect for one's mother is pleasant in the world, and respect for one's father is pleasant, respect for ascetics is pleasant in the world, and respect for brahmans is pleasant.

##### 333

Sukhaṃ yāva jarā sīlaṃ, sukhā saddhā patiṭṭhitā, sukho paññāya paṭilābho, pāpānaṃ akaraṇaṃ sukhaṃ.

- 至老持戒樂，正信成就樂，獲得智慧樂，不作諸惡樂。
- Virtue lasting until old age is pleasant, established faith is pleasant, the obtaining of knowledge is pleasant, the non-doing of evil deeds is pleasant.